# Chapter 1: Building Abstractions with Procedures

The chapter begins by quoting **John Locke** from *An Essay Concerning Human Understanding*. John talks about how mind exercises power over simple ideas in 3 ways: by combining several simple ideas into a complex one, by studying the relational aspects between two different ideas and by separating an idea from accompanying ideas to generalize it (called as abstraction).

We are then introduced to three concepts of computer science - computational process, data and program - in a very unique way. 
*Computational processes* are described as abstract beings (spirits) which inhabit computers and are capable of performing intellectual work. 
*Data* are abstract things which get manipulated by the computational processes. 
*Programs* are pattern of rules which direct and govern these computational processes.

Programmers then become sorcerers who write spells (programs) to summon the computational processes to do that tasks that they want to perform.
I love this analogy because through this learning to program becomes a little like learning to perform sorcery/magic. And the programming languages are different languages of spells which are used to tell the computational processes on what to do. The idea of robotic arms moving in factories or ATM machines dispensing cash does seem like magic.

We are then introduced to the programming language called **Lisp** and its history. Lisp was invented in 1950s by John McCarthy as a formalism to reason about use of *recursion equations*. It mainly delved in symbol manipulation for problems involving symbolic differentiation and integration. Lisp evolved experimentally to become a practical programming language. 

A machine which carries out the processes described in lisp language is called a lisp interpreter. There are several dialects of lisp now in popular use - clojure, common lisp, scheme etc. Lisp had issues of efficiency earlier but that has now largely been solved with the use of modern Lisp compilers which translate lisp programs into machine code more efficiently.

We are told that Lisp is a powerful language to learn programming because of some of its unique features. One of the powerful features of Lisp is how the ideas of procedures (description of processes) and data blur. Procedures can become data and data can become procedures. Procedures in lisp can be used to manipulate other procedures as if it were data - this makes it a good choice for writing programs where program manipulation is needed such as interpreters and compilers.

## Elements of Programming

Programming Languages are not only the means to provide instructions to a computer to perform different tasks, it should also provide to us a framework to organize our thoughts and ideas about different processes. The means that a programming language provides us to combine simple ideas into a complex one is very important. All powerful programs have three mechanisms that support this:
- primitive expressions - which represent the simplest entities that the language is concerned with
- means of combination - how compound elements are built using simpler elements.
- means of abstraction - how these compound elements can be named and manipulated as a unit

Any powerful programming language should have the means to describe primitive data and primitive procedures, and have ways for combining and abstracting procedures and data.

### Expressions

Numbers are a type of primitive data in lisp.
A number evaluates to itself.

+, -, \* and / are primitive procedures in lisp.

Primitive procedure and primitive data elements can be combined to make an expression called *combination*

```
(+ 56 42)
```
+ -> is called operator
56 and 42 are the operands

Lisp interpreter evaluates the value of the expression by applying the computational process describe in the operator to the operands.

We use the prefix notation is lisp which allows us to have any number of operands in an expression and also allows us to nest another combination expression within an operand infinitely.

```
(+ (* 3 4) (/ 6 2) (- 9 7))
```

For all expressions, Lisp interpreter operates in the same basic way - it reads the expression, evaluates it and prints the result (read, evaluate, print, loop - also called REPL).

### Naming the Environment

A powerful programming language should also provide a way to refer to computational objects using names. Name identifies a *variable* whose *value* is the object.

This is how Scheme dialect of lisp does it:

```
(define size 2)
```

This causes the lisp interpreter to associate the name *size* to the value 2.

**define** is the language's simplest means of abstraction. It allows for the use of simple names to represent even compound expressions.

```
(define r 10)
(define pi 3.14)
(define circumference (* 2 pi r))
```

To be able to associate a name to a value and later retrieve it, an interpreter maintains name-object pairs in some sort of memory - this is called an environment. A computational process can involve a number of different environments.

### Evaluating Combinations

It is important to have a model of how an interpreter evaluates a combination to be able to write programs which do what we want.
To evaluate a combination, the lisp interpreter must also be following a procedure.
This could be the procedure for evaluating a combination:
1. evaluate the subexpressions of the combination.
2. apply the procedure that is the value of the leftmost subexpression(operator) to the values of the other subexpressions (operands).

Step 1 is recursive in nature here. The subexpression in the expression can also be a combination and the evaluation steps will be applied to them again - until we reach primitive operators or numerals or named objects.

The value of numerals are the numerals themselves. The value of primitive operators are the machine instruction sequences associated with those operators. The value of named objects are the objects associated with those names in the environment.
*The primitive operator is also a named object whose value is the sequence of machine instructions*

Evaluation of a combination can be visualised as a tree:

```
(* (+ 2 (* 4 6))
   (+ 3 5 7))
```

                                     390
                                    
                                  /   |        \
                                 *    26        15
                                     /|\      /\ /\
                                    + 2 24   + 3 5 7

Environment provides the context in which the evaluation of an expression happens.

The general evaluation rule described above does not apply to some special forms like *define*

### Compound procedure

A compound procedure can be created by giving a procedure definition.

This is the syntax

```
(define (<name> <formal parameters>) (<body>))
```

An example

```
(define (square x) (* x x))
```

A compound procedure is used in exactly the same way as primitive built-in procedures.

```
(square 7)
```

Compound procedures can be used as building blocks to construct more compound procedures and so on.
This abstraction technique is a powerful technique in a programming language to organize complex ideas.

```
(define (sum-of-squares x y) (+ (square x) (square y)))
```

### Substitution model for procedure application

Substitution model is 'model' (not an accurate representation) to help us think about how interpreters evaluate compound procedures.

In substitution model, the formal parameters in the body of a function are progressively replaced by the actual parameters.

If 'f' is procedure defined as below:

```
(define (f a) (sum-of-squares (+ a 1) (* a 2)))
```

Here is how we can use the substituion model to understand how the interpreter would evaluate the expression `(f 5)`

```
(f 5)
// body of f is retrieved and a is replaced with 5
(sum-of-squares (+ 5 1) (* 5 2))
(sum-of-squares 6 10)
// body of sum-of-squares is retrieved and the formal parameters are replaced with the arguments
(+ (square 6) (square 10))
// body of square is retrieved and formal parameters are replaced with the arguments
(+ (* 6 6) (* 10 10))
//expression is evaluated 
(+ 36 100)
136
```

There are 2 different ways in which the above could have been evaluated. In the above example the operands in each stage were evaluated before the next stage. This is called **applicative-order evaluation**
There could be another approach where the expression could be expanded until we reach primitive operators or until their values were needed. For example

```
(f 5)
(sum-of-squares (+5 1) (* 5 2))
(+ (square (+ 5 1) (square (* 5 2)))
(+ (* (+ 5 1) (+ 5 1)) (* (* 5 2) (* 5 2)))
(+ (* 6 6) (* 10 10))
(+ 36 100)
(136)
```

normal-order evaluation and applicative-order evaluation generally give the same result - but not always. Lisp interpreter uses applicative-order evaluation to avoid multiple evaluations


### Conditional Expressions and predicates

To be able to perform different operations depending on the result of a test - is an important construct in a programming language.
In lisp, this is done using two special form of expressions - *cond* and *if*

Syntax for cond expressions

```
(cond (<p1> <e1>)
      (<p2> <e2>)
      (<p3> <e3>)
      .
      .
      .
      (<pn> <en>))
```

(<p><e>) is called a clause.
p is predicate - an expression whose value is either #t or #f
e is an expression or a sequence of expressions called consequent expression.

*cond* expressions are evaluated as follows:
- The first predicate is evaluated to true or false.
- If the first predicate is false, the next predicate is evaluated and so on.
- If a predicate is true, the consequent expression is evaluated. The value of the consequent expression is the value of cond expression.
- if none of the predicates return true, the value of the cond is undefined.
- else as the predicate always returns true.

An example of cond expression

```
(define (abs x)
    (cond ((< x 0) (- x))
          (else x)))
```

*if* is another type of conditional construct used when only two case analysis is needed.

```
(if (predicate) (consequent) (alternative))
```

*if* expressions are evaluated as follows:
- predicate is evaluated first
- if predicate returns true, the expression value of consequent is the value of the if expression
- if predicate value is false, the expression value of alternative is the value of the if expression
- consequent and alternative can contain only a single expression (unlike cond)

if and cond are both special forms - which means that all the values of the operands are not evaluated.

Example
```
(define (abs x)
    (if (< x 0)
        (- x)
        x))
```

Note: Any value other than #f is treated as true in lisp

<, >, = are primitive predicates 
and, or and not are some logical composition operators which enable us to construct compound predicates.

`(and <e1> <e2>....<en>)`
The values of expressions e1, e2,...en are evaluated. If any of the expressions return a false value, the evaluation is stopped and the value of the expression is false.
if all the values of the expression evaluate to true, the value of last expression is the value of the and expression

`(or <e1> <e2>...<en>)`
The values of expressions e1, e2...en are evaluated. If any of the expression return a true value, the value of the expression is the value of the or expression.
if none of the expressions return a true value, the or expression evaluates to false.

Note: Both *and* and *or* are special forms - all the operands are not evaluated.

`(not <e>)`
if e evaluates to #t, the value of the expression is false, and vice versa.




